# RS-Understanding Martian Processes Through PCA
 Abstract: Our study utilizes Python and various data science libraries to preprocess, analyze, and visualize key isotopic ratio datasets from Martian meteorites. We mainly focus on the isotopes of strontium (85r/865r), neodymium (143Nd/144Nd), and lead (206pb/204рb, 207рb/204рb, 208pb/204pb), but also hafnium (17Hf/'"Hf) and rhenium-osmium (187Re/188Os). Preprocessing methods included addressing missing values, standardizing numerical variables, removing statistical outliers, and organizing only the relevant isotopic data. To identify underlying patterns, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was applied to reduce dimensionality and identify key patterns within the dataset. To further explore the relationships between isotopic ratios, statistical visualization techniques were leveraged, including correlation heatmaps of isotopic ratios to reveal any dependencies, and PCA biplots to interpret principal component relationships. These approaches enhance data accessibility and provide a structured framework for analyzing the potential origins and processes that have produced Martian meteorites. PLa biplot or Isotopic Data Basaltic Shergottite Our initial results reveal that 2 principal components account for 97.5% of our dataset, which we interpret as 3 geochemical endmembers that play a role in the formation of Martian meteorites. This is supported by the clustering of Martian meteorites in PCA space. These findings suggest a linked geochemical process; e.g., mantle source(s), melt extraction, crystallization, or assimilation. Data cleaning makes previously obscured trends apparent, which allows for increased clarity of isotopic trends between meteorite groups. Our refined dataset allows for more accurate visualizations via integrating computation techniques with geochemical data and improves our understanding of Martian meteorite origins and their isotopic evolution.
